<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head><title>Eagle and Empire</title>
<meta charset="utf-8"/><link href="style/prhStyle.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><link href="style/prhStyle-media-queries.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><link href="style/Smal_9780804177276_epub3_css_r1.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:95b6b968-137a-4c7e-8b9d-5b06841ca3cf" name="Adept.expected.resource"/></head>
<body><a id="d1-d2s9d3s15"/><div class="page_top_padding"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page543" title="543"/>
<h1 class="para-apt-alt-app-pg"><span class="char-ccust3">APPENDIX</span> <span class="char-ccust4">VII</span></h1>
<h1 class="para-apt"><span class="char-b">FURTHER READING</span></h1>
<p class="para-appf">In addition to the books listed in the Further Reading sections of <em class="char-i">Clash of Eagles</em> and <em class="char-i">Eagle in Exile</em>, I found the following useful in researching and writing <em class="char-i">Eagle and Empire</em>.</p>
<p class="para-bib">Kenneth M. Ames and Herbert D. G. Maschner, <em class="char-i">Peoples of the Northwest Coast: Their Archeology and Prehistory,</em> 2000.</p>
<p class="para-bib">Anthony Aveni, <em class="char-i">Empires of Time: Calendars, Clocks, and Culture,</em> 2002.</p>
<p class="para-bib">Duncan B. Campbell and Brian Delf, <em class="char-i">Roman Auxiliary Forts 27 BC–AD 378,</em> 2009.</p>
<p class="para-bib">Lawrence W. Cheek, <em class="char-i">A.D. 1250: Ancient Peoples of the Southwest,</em> 1994.</p>
<p class="para-bib">Craig Childs, <em class="char-i">House of Rain: Tracking a Vanished Civilization Across the American Southwest,</em> 2008.</p>
<p class="para-bib">Clayton Chun, <em class="char-i">US Army in the Plains Indian Wars 1865–1891</em>, 2013.</p>
<p class="para-bib">Ross Cowan, <em class="char-i">Roman Guardsmen 62 BC–AD 324</em>, 2014.</p>
<p class="para-bib">Ross Cowan and Sean O’Brogain, <em class="char-i">Roman Legionary AD 284–337: The Age of Diocletian and Constantine the Great</em>, 2015.</p>
<p class="para-bib">Thomas J. Craughwell, <em class="char-i">The Rise and Fall of the Second Largest Empire in History: How Genghis Khan’s Mongols Almost Conquered the World,</em> 2010.</p>
<p class="para-bib">Raffaele D’Amato and Graham Sumner, <em class="char-i">Imperial Roman Naval Forces 31 BC–AD 500,</em> 2009.</p>
<p class="para-bib">Louis A. DiMarco, <em class="char-i">War Horse: A History of the Military Horse and Rider,</em> 2012.</p>
<p class="para-bib">Daniela Dueck, <em class="char-i">Geography in Classical Antiquity</em>, 2012.</p>
<p class="para-bib">Elizabeth A. Fenn, <em class="char-i">Encounters at the Heart of the World: A History of the Mandan People,</em> 2015.</p>
<p class="para-bib">Nic Fields and Adam Hook, <em class="char-i">Roman Auxiliary Cavalryman: AD 14–193,</em> 2006.</p>
<p class="para-bib">Nic Fields and Donato Spedaliere, <em class="char-i">Rome’s Northern Frontier AD 70–235: Beyond Hadrian’s Wall</em>, 2003.</p>
<p class="para-bib">Horace Greeley, <em class="char-i">An Overland Journey from New York to San Francisco in the Summer of 1859</em>, 1860.</p><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page544" title="544"/>
<p class="para-bib">Valerie Hansen, <em class="char-i">The Silk Road: A New History,</em> 2012.</p>
<p class="para-bib">Michael Johnson and Jonathan Smith, <em class="char-i">American Indian Tribes of the Southwest,</em> 2013.</p>
<p class="para-bib">John Keegan, <em class="char-i">A History of Warfare,</em> 1994.</p>
<p class="para-bib">D. Lindholm, D. Nicolle, and A. McBride, <em class="char-i">Medieval Scandinavian Armies (1), 1100–1300</em>, 2003.</p>
<p class="para-bib">Randolph Barnes Marcy, <em class="char-i">The Prairie Traveler: A Handbook for Overland Expeditions,</em> 1859.</p>
<p class="para-bib">Randolph B. Marcy and George B. McClellan, <em class="char-i">Exploration of the Red River of Louisiana in the Year 1852,</em> 1854.</p>
<p class="para-bib">Timothy May, <em class="char-i">The Mongol Art of War,</em> 2007.</p>
<p class="para-bib">Sean McLachlan, <em class="char-i">Medieval Handgonnes: The First Black Powder Infantry Weapons,</em> 2010.</p>
<p class="para-bib">Frank McLynn, <em class="char-i">Genghis Khan: His Conquests, His Empire, His Legacy,</em> 2015.</p>
<p class="para-bib">David Nicolle and Adam Hook, <em class="char-i">European Medieval Tactics (1): The Fall and Rise of Cavalry 450–1260</em>, 2011.</p>
<p class="para-bib">David Nicolle and Adam Hook, <em class="char-i">European Medieval Tactics (2): The Revival of Infantry 1260–1500</em>, 2012.</p>
<p class="para-bib">David Nicolle and Victor Korolkov, <em class="char-i">Kalka River 1223: Genghiz Khan’s Mongols Invade Russia</em>, 2001.</p>
<p class="para-bib">David Nicolle and Angus McBride, <em class="char-i">Attila and the Nomad Hordes,</em> 1990.</p>
<p class="para-bib">David Nicolle and Angus McBride, <em class="char-i">Armies of Medieval Russia 750–1250,</em> 1999.</p>
<p class="para-bib">Lincoln Paine, <em class="char-i">The Sea and Civilization: A Maritime History of the World,</em> 2015.</p>
<p class="para-bib">Timothy R. Pauketat and Susan M. Alt, <em class="char-i">Medieval Mississippians: The Cahokian World</em>, 2015.</p>
<p class="para-bib">Timothy R. Pauketat and Diana DiPaolo Loren, <em class="char-i">North American Archaeology</em>, 2005.</p>
<p class="para-bib">C. J. Peers, <em class="char-i">Soldiers of the Dragon: Chinese Armies 1500 BC–AD 1840,</em> 2006.</p>
<p class="para-bib">Stephen Plog, <em class="char-i">Ancient Peoples of the American Southwest,</em> 1997.</p>
<p class="para-bib">Marco Polo, <em class="char-i">The Travels,</em> edited R. E. Latham, 1958.</p>
<p class="para-bib">Charles M. Robinson, <em class="char-i">The Plains Wars 1757–1900</em>, 2003.</p>
<p class="para-bib">Gordon L. Rottman and Peter Dennis, <em class="char-i">World War II Glider Assault Tactics,</em> 2014.</p>
<p class="para-bib">Paula L. Sabloff, <em class="char-i">Modern Mongolia: Reclaiming Genghis Khan,</em> 2001.</p>
<p class="para-bib">Sarangerel, <em class="char-i">Riding Windhorses: A Journey into the Heart of Mongolian Shamanism,</em> 2000.</p>
<p class="para-bib">Si Sheppard and Christa Hook, <em class="char-i">Actium 31 B.C.: Downfall of Antony and Cleopatra,</em> 2009.</p>
<p class="para-bib">Stephen Turnbull, <em class="char-i">Genghis Khan and the Mongol Conquests 1190–1400,</em> 2003.</p>
<p class="para-bib">Stephen Turnbull and Wayne Reynolds, <em class="char-i">Siege Weapons of the Far East (1),</em> 2001.</p>
<p class="para-bib">Stephen Turnbull and Wayne Reynolds, <em class="char-i">Siege Weapons of the Far East (2),</em> 2002.</p>
<p class="para-bib">Stephen Turnbull and Wayne Reynolds, <em class="char-i">Fighting Ships of the Far East (1): China and Southeast Asia 202 BC–AD 1419,</em> 2002.</p>
<p class="para-bib">Stephen Turnbull and Wayne Reynolds, <em class="char-i">Fighting Ships of the Far East (2): Japan and Korea, AD 612–1639,</em> 2003.</p>
<p class="para-bib">Stephen Turnbull and Wayne Reynolds, <em class="char-i">Mongol Warrior 1200–1350,</em> 2003.</p>
<p class="para-bib">Jack Weatherford, <em class="char-i">Genghis Khan and the Making of the Modern World,</em> 2004.</p>
<p class="para-bib">Jack Weatherford, <em class="char-i">The Secret History of the Mongol Queens,</em> 2010.</p></div></body></html>