<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head><title>Eagle and Empire</title>
<meta charset="utf-8"/><link href="style/prhStyle.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><link href="style/prhStyle-media-queries.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><link href="style/Smal_9780804177276_epub3_css_r1.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:95b6b968-137a-4c7e-8b9d-5b06841ca3cf" name="Adept.expected.resource"/></head>
<body><a id="d1-d2s9d3s14"/><div class="page_top_padding"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page535" title="535"/>
<h1 class="para-apt-alt-app-pg"><span class="char-ccust3">APPENDIX</span> <span class="char-ccust4">VI</span></h1>
<h1 class="para-apt"><span class="char-b">GLOSSARY OF MILITARY TERMS FROM </span>THE ROMAN IMPERIUM</h1>
<p class="para-appf">A glossary of Roman terms, Latin translations, and military terminology appears below, along with a few Mongol terms.</p>
<p class="para-app">Many aspects of Roman warfare have remained unchanged since classical times, but language evolves, and in a few cases the meanings of words have migrated from their original usage in the Republic and the early Empire.</p><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page536" title="536"/><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page537" title="537"/><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page538" title="538"/><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page539" title="539"/><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page540" title="540"/><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page541" title="541"/><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page542" title="542"/>
<div>
<p class="para-glof"><span class="char-gt">Ala:</span> Cavalry unit or “wing.” An ala quingenaria consists of 512 troopers in sixteen turmae; an ala milliaria consists of 768 troopers in twenty-four turmae (plural: alae).</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Animus:</span> Martial spirit.</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Aquila:</span> The Eagle, the standard of a Roman legion; often golden or gilded and carried proudly into battle. The loss of an Eagle is one of the greatest shames that can befall a legion.</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Aquilifer:</span> Eagle bearer; the legionary tasked with carrying the legion’s standard into battle (plural: aquiliferi).</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Arban:</span> Unit of ten warriors (Mongol).</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Auxiliaries:</span> Noncitizen troops in the Roman army, drawn from peoples in the provinces of the Imperium. Career soldiers trained to the same standards as legionaries, they can expect to receive citizenship at the end of their twenty-five-year service. Originally kept in their own separate units, auxiliary infantrymen have been integrated into the regular legionary cohorts.</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Ballista:</span> Siege engine; a tension- or spring-powered catapult that fires bolts, arrows, or other pointy missiles of wood and metal. Resembles a giant crossbow and often is mounted in a wooden frame or carried in a cart (plural: ballistae).</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Barding:</span> Armored protection for horses, constructed of hinged metal plate or scale, chain, leather, or cloth.</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Caligae:</span> Heavy-soled military marching boots with an open sandal-like design.</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Cardo:</span> Colloquial term for the wide main street oriented north-south in Roman cities, military fortresses, and marching camps (more formally known as the Via Praetoria for the southern part and the Via Decumana for the northern part).</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Castra:</span> Military marching camp; temporary accommodation for a legion, often rebuilt each night on the march.</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Cataphractaria:</span> Armored heavy cavalry, with both horse and rider protected by metal plate or scale armor. Riders generally are armed with a heavy spear similar to a lance (see also barding, chamfron, contus).</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Centurion:</span> Professional army officer in command of a century.</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Century:</span> Army company, ideally eighty to a hundred men.</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Chamfron:</span> Armored facial protection for horses, generally extending from the ears to the muzzle and constructed of metal plate or scale, or leather.</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Close order:</span> Infantry formation, with men massed at a separation often as small as eighteen inches, making a phalanx or another close formation difficult to penetrate or break up.</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Cohors equitata:</span> Mixed unit of cavalry and infantry that trains together, generally consisting of six centuries and four turmae, ten centuries and eight turmae, or some other combination with a similar ratio of foot soldiers to cavalrymen (plural: cohortes equitatae).</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Cohort:</span> Tactical unit of a Roman legion; each cohort consists of six centuries. Sometimes the First Cohort in a legion is double-strength.</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Contubernium:</span> Squad of eight legionaries who serve together, bunk together in a single tent (in a castra) or building (in a fortress barracks), and often are disciplined together for infractions (plural: contubernia).</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Contus:</span> Heavy wooden cavalry lance, typically around twelve feet in length, wielded two-handed or couched under the arm (plural: conti).</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Cornicen:</span> Junior Roman officer who signals orders to centuries and legions with a trumpet or cornu.</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Cornu:</span> Horn used to communicate signals and instructions to troops, carried and blown by a cornicen. A brass instrument around ten feet long, curved into a G shape, and looped around the head (plural: cornua).</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Corvus:</span> Literally, “crow”; a wide gangplank or rotating bridge that anchors a Roman warship to the bank with a heavy metal spike or can be embedded into the deck of an enemy vessel so that it can be boarded.</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Cuneus:</span> Literally, “wedge” or “pig’s head”; dense military formation used to smash through an enemy’s battle line or break through a gap.</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Cymba:</span> Boat.</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Damnatio Memoriae:</span> A drastic punishment, the ultimate condemnation for a legion or individual who brings discredit to Roma. The name of the legion or individual would be erased from the historical record, expunged from lists and monuments as if it had never existed.</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Decurion:</span> Professional army officer in command of a turma of cavalrymen. Roughly equivalent in rank to a centurion.</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Dignitas:</span> Dignity.</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Drekar:</span> Dragon ship, Viking longship (Norse).</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Duplicarius:</span> Decurion’s deputy, second in command of a turma.</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Forum:</span> Public square or plaza, often a marketplace.</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Gladius:</span> Roman sword (plural: gladii).</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Greek fire:</span> Liquid incendiary, probably based on naphtha and/or sulfur, although the recipe was lost in Europa and is a closely guarded secret in Nova Hesperia.</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Harpax:</span> Harpoon, naval grapnel fired by a ballista, that allows an enemy vessel to be secured and winched alongside for boarding.</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Hasta:</span> Heavy thrusting spear used by infantry. Generally around six feet long (plural: hastae).</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Imago:</span> Image, copy, ancestral likeness. The image of the current Imperator displayed on a standard or banner.</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Imperator:</span> Emperor; Roman commander in chief.</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Imperium:</span> Empire; executive power, the sovereignty of the state.</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Jaghun:</span> Unit of one hundred warriors, or ten arbans (Mongol).</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Knarr:</span> Cargo ship; high-sided and broader, deeper, and not as long as a longship (Norse).</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Lancea:</span> Short javelin (plural: lanceae).</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Lares:</span> Roman household gods, domestic deities, guardians of the hearth.</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Legate:</span> Senior commander of a legion, more completely known as legatus legionis. By the thirteenth century, “legate” and “Praetor” are synonymous.</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Legion:</span> Army unit of several thousand men consisting of ten cohorts, each of six centuries.</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Legionary:</span> Professional soldier in the Roman army. A Roman citizen, highly trained, who serves for twenty-five years.</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Medicus:</span> Military doctor, field surgeon, or orderly (plural: medici).</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Mingghan:</span> Unit of one thousand warriors, or ten jaghuns (Mongol).</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Navis:</span> Ship.</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Onager:</span> Siege engine; torsion-powered, single-armed catapult that launches rocks or other nonpointy missiles. Literally translates to “wild ass” because of its bucking motion when fired. Often mounted in a square wooden frame.</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Open order:</span> Infantry formation, with soldiers in battle lines separated by up to six feet and often staggered, providing room to maneuver, shoot arrows, throw pila or swing gladii, and switch or change ranks.</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Optio:</span> Centurion’s deputy, second in command of the century (plural: optiones).</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Orbis:</span> Literally, “circle”; a defensive military formation in the shape of a circle or square, adopted when under attack from a numerically superior force.</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Patrician:</span> Aristocratic, upper-class, or ruling-class Roman citizen.</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Phalanx:</span> Mass infantry formation, generally rectangular and in very close order. A solid block of soldiers.</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Phalera:</span> Military decoration awarded for distinguished conduct, usually a sculpted disk of gold, silver, or bronze. Worn by an individual legionary or cavalryman or paraded by a military unit on the staff of the unit’s standards (plural: phalerae).</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Pilum:</span> Roman heavy spear or javelin (plural: pila).</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Porta Praetoria:</span> South gate of a legionary fortress or castra, leading onto the Via Praetoria (or Cardo).</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Praetor:</span> Roman general, commander of a legion or of an entire army. In the Republic and early Empire the term also was used for some senior magistrates and consuls; the latter usage has died out by the time of Hadrianus III, and only legionary commanders are referred to as Praetors.</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Praetorian:</span> A special force of elite troops who served as the Imperator’s personal guard and often trained with him or were trained by him. May also serve as shock troops.</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Praetorium:</span> Praetor’s tent within a castra or residence within a legionary fortress, situated at the center of the encampment.</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Primus pilus:</span> See senior centurion.</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Principia:</span> Legionary headquarters building, situated at or near the center of a legionary fortress.</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Pugio:</span> Dagger carried by legionaries; Roman stabbing weapon.</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Quinquereme:</span> Heavy Roman warship with five banks of oarsmen on three levels, one above the other, in a two-two-one pattern.</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Roma:</span> The city of Roma, capital of the Roman Imperium, although often used as shorthand to mean the Imperium as a whole.</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Sagum:</span> Military cloak made of a rectangular piece of heavy wool and fastened with a clasp at the shoulder.</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Scorpio:</span> Torsion crossbow that fires metal bolts; a small Roman artillery piece built on the same principles as a ballista but designed to be used by a single legionary.</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Scutum:</span> Roman legionary shield (plural: scuta).</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Senior centurion:</span> Also known as the primus pilus. The most experienced and highly valued centurion in the legion, he commands the first century within the First Cohort.</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Signifer:</span> Standard-bearer; the legionary tasked with carrying a signum for a century (plural: signiferi).</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Signum:</span> A century’s standard, usually consisting of a number of metal disks and other insignia mounted on a pole (plural: signa).</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Spatha:</span> Roman long sword, often used by cavalry (plural: spathae).</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Testudo:</span> Literally, “tortoise”; Roman infantry formation in which soldiers in close order protect themselves by holding shields over their heads and around them, enclosing them within a protective roof and wall of metal.</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Trebuchet:</span> Siege weapon designed to fling large nonpointy projectiles using a lever arm; the Mongol trebuchets are traction trebuchets, powered by large teams of soldiers pulling ropes in unison, rather than counterweight trebuchets that take advantage of gravity.</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Tribune:</span> Roman officer, midway in rank between the legion commander and his centurions. Originally a more generalized military staff officer; by 1218 A.D. the tribunes have administrative and operational responsibilities for specific cohorts within their legions.</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Triplex acies:</span> Three-line battle formation.</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Trireme:</span> Heavy Roman warship with three banks of oarsmen, one above the other.</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Tumen:</span> Unit of ten thousand warriors, or ten mingghans (Mongol).</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Turma:</span> Squadron of cavalry, subunit of an ala. One turma consists of thirty troopers and two officers (a decurion and a duplicarius) (plural: turmae).</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Urbs:</span> City.</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Vexillation:</span> Large detachment of legionaries that form a temporary task force with a specific strategic purpose.</p>
<p class="para-glo"><span class="char-gt">Virtus:</span> Valor.</p></div></div></body></html>