<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head><title>Eagle and Empire</title>
<meta charset="utf-8"/><link href="style/prhStyle.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><link href="style/prhStyle-media-queries.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><link href="style/Smal_9780804177276_epub3_css_r1.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:95b6b968-137a-4c7e-8b9d-5b06841ca3cf" name="Adept.expected.resource"/></head>
<body><a id="d1-d2s9d3s13"/><div class="page_top_padding"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page531" title="531"/>
<h1 class="para-apt-alt-app-pg"><span class="char-ccust3">APPENDIX V</span></h1>
<h1 class="para-apt"><span class="char-b">TRAVELS IN NOVA HESPERIA: GEOGRAPHIC NOTES</span></h1>
<p class="para-appf">In <em class="char-i">Eagle and Empire,</em> Gaius Marcellinus and his allies and enemies rove extensively across Nova Hesperia. This section is for readers who may want to follow these travels on a map of modern-day North America. However, if you’re coming to this appendix before reading the book, you should note that it contains significant plot details and spoilers.</p>
<p class="para-app">After conquering the western coast of Nova Hesperia, Chinggis Khan splits his army into several parts to subdue and explore the region and make plans for his eastward expansion into the continent. This division into several units was a common Mongol strategy. In addition to allowing the plunder of a greater expanse of territory, it helped ensure sufficient grazing for the horses. Grass was always a limited resource for a mounted force the size of the Khan’s.</p>
<p class="para-app">The army of Chagatai takes a northern route. With the help (willing or otherwise) of the Tlingit, the Haida, and the peoples of the inland plateau, his army follows the Columbia, Snake, and Clearwater rivers east and crosses the Continental Divide at what is now known as Lemhi Pass, on the border between Idaho and Montana. Lemhi Pass was a major route across the mountains for the Blackfoot and other tribes and is the pass that was traversed by Lewis and Clark in their westward exploration. Lewis described it as a “large and plain Indian road,” but it would be no picnic for an army the size of Chagatai’s. In <em class="char-i">Eagle and Empire</em>, Chagatai drives the defeated Shoshoni ahead of him. It is they who hurry down the Missouri River into Blackfoot territory and ultimately provide Tahtay and the Cahokians with their first warning of the Mongols’ advance.</p><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page532" title="532"/>
<p class="para-app">Meanwhile, the army of Chinggis Khan crosses the Rockies much farther south in Colorado via the Monarch Pass route, and the forces under Subodei Badahur and Jebei Noyon travel far down the Pacific coast to the Oaxaca region of Mexico. There, with extensive help from the People of the Sun—otherwise known as the Maya of the Postclassic period—they arrange to portage the battle junks overland to the Gulf of Mexico. Once passage across the isthmus is assured, Subodei Badahur returns to the Khan’s camp to brief him and get his orders for the eastward assault.</p>
<p class="para-app">The expedition to the southwest led by Marcellinus and Sextus Bassus takes them three hundred miles up the Missouri River by quinquereme to where the Kansas River flows into it at the confluence where Kansas City, Missouri, is today. From there they travel eight hundred miles overland by way of the Native American route now known as the Santa Fe Trail through Kansas, Colorado, and New Mexico. The trail leaves the Missouri River and drops down to the Arkansas River (known as the Kicka River in <em class="char-i">Eagle and Empire</em>). They follow the Arkansas River, and where the Santa Fe Trail splits, they take the so-called Mountain Route rather than the more hazardous Cimarron Crossing to Santa Fe. From there it’s less than two hundred miles to Chaco Canyon.</p>
<p class="para-app">The People of the Hand are of course the Ancestral Pueblo People, historically known as the Anasazi, although that word stems from a term of abuse in Navajo and is not now favored. Yupkoyvi is Chaco Canyon, and Pueblo Bonito is the Great House that Bassus’s men attempt to defend. Marcellinus’s expedition is arriving at the very tail end of the Chaco Culture, when many of the Great Houses were abandoned and occupation of the area was sparse, a mere shadow of its former glory. The Sentinel Rock, from which the alarm is belatedly given in the book, is known today as Fajada Butte. The town of Tyuonyi lies within Bandelier National Monument. The massive band of warriors of the Hand who later come to Cahokia to join the Hesperian League assembles from Tawtoyka—our Mesa Verde—and other extensive cliff dwellings that existed all across the Four Corners area that included parts of Utah, Arizona, New Mexico, and Colorado.</p><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page533" title="533"/>
<p class="para-app">After the massacre at Yupkoyvi, Marcellinus and his meager group of survivors are taken on a forced march of some four hundred miles to a plains area in southern Colorado. The Mongol great camp where Marcellinus first has the pleasure of making Chinggis Khan’s acquaintance is situated close to the Colorado–New Mexico border.</p>
<p class="para-app">After tea and murder with the Khan, Marcellinus returns eastward down the (terribly named) Canadian River through New Mexico, the Texas Panhandle, and Oklahoma to the Arkansas (Kicka) River. The Arkansas flows into the Mississippi at Napoleon (now a ghost town) in Desha County, Arkansas. In the meantime, of course, Subodei Badahur has attacked the Legio VI Ferrata by sea and then devastated the Market of the Mud (in southern Louisiana, near New Orleans) before heading north up the Mississippi.</p>
<p class="para-app">Once Marcellinus’s party joins the fleet of Calidius Verus, they travel some 85 miles north up the Mississippi to Shappa Ta’atan, which is situated where Helena, Arkansas, is today. There they battle Badahur’s river fleet. From Shappa Ta’atan back to Cahokia is about another 350 miles.</p>
<p class="para-app">The Khan’s army rides east toward Cahokia along the Platte River (called the Braided River in <em class="char-i">Eagle and Empire</em>) and eventually meets up with the army of Chagatai to do battle with the Romans. Forward Camp, where the Romans prepare for the final confrontation, is in the rolling tallgrass prairies of eastern Nebraska at the confluence of the Platte and Wemissori rivers, not far from where Omaha is today.</p></div></body></html>