<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head><title>Eagle and Empire</title>
<meta charset="utf-8"/><link href="style/prhStyle.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><link href="style/prhStyle-media-queries.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><link href="style/Smal_9780804177276_epub3_css_r1.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:95b6b968-137a-4c7e-8b9d-5b06841ca3cf" name="Adept.expected.resource"/></head>
<body><a id="d1-d2s3"/><div class="page_top_padding"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="pagevi" title="vi"/>
<p class="para-crtf-crt-pg"><em class="char-i">Eagle and Empire</em> is a work of fiction. Names, characters, places, and incidents are the products of the author’s imagination or are used fictitiously. Any resemblance to any persons, living or dead, events, or locales is entirely coincidental.</p>
<p class="para-crtf">Copyright © 2017 by Alan Smale</p>
<p class="para-crt">Map copyright © 2015, 2017 by Simon M. Sullivan</p>
<p class="para-crtf">All rights reserved.</p>
<p class="para-crtf">Published in the United States by Del Rey, an imprint of Random House, a division of Penguin Random House LLC, New York.</p>
<p class="para-crtf">D<span class="smallcaps char-sc">EL</span> R<span class="smallcaps char-sc">EY</span> and the H<span class="smallcaps char-sc">OUSE</span> colophon are registered trademarks of Penguin Random House LLC.</p>
<p class="para-cipf">Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data</p>
<p class="para-cip">Names: Smale, Alan (Astronomer), author.</p>
<p class="para-cip">Title: Eagle and empire / Alan Smale.</p>
<p class="para-cip">Description: New York : Del Rey, [2017] | Series: The clash of eagles trilogy ; book 3</p>
<p class="para-cip">Identifiers: LCCN 2016051385| ISBN 9780804177269 (hardback) | ISBN 9780804177276 (ebook)</p>
<p class="para-cip">Subjects: LCSH: Rome—History—Fiction. | BISAC: FICTION / Fantasy / Historical. | FICTION / Action &amp; Adventure. | FICTION / Alternative History. | GSAFD: Alternative histories (Fiction) | Historical fiction.</p>
<p class="para-cip">Classification: LCC PS3619.M33 E23 2017 | DDC 813/.6—dc23</p>
<p class="para-cip">LC record available at <a class="char-url" href="https://lccn.loc.gov/2016051385">https://lccn.loc.gov/​2016051385</a></p>
<p class="para-crtf">Ebook ISBN 9780804177276</p>
<p class="para-crtf"><a class="char-url" href="http://randomhousebooks.com">randomhousebooks.com</a></p>
<p class="para-crtf"><em class="char-i">Book design by Elizabeth A. D. Eno, adapted for ebook</em></p>
<p class="para-crtf">Cover design: David G. Stevenson</p>
<p class="para-crt">Cover illustration: © Larry Rostant</p>
<p class="para-crt spaceabove conversion_code_spec">v4.1</p>
<p class="para-crt conversion_code_partner">ep</p></div></body></html>