<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head><title>Eagle and Empire</title>
<meta charset="utf-8"/><link href="style/prhStyle.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><link href="style/prhStyle-media-queries.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><link href="style/Smal_9780804177276_epub3_css_r1.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:95b6b968-137a-4c7e-8b9d-5b06841ca3cf" name="Adept.expected.resource"/></head>
<body><a id="d1-d2s9d3s7"/><div class="page_top_padding"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page505" title="505"/>
<h1 class="para-bmt-ack-pg"><span class="char-ccust3">A<span class="smallcaps">CKNOWLEDGMENTS</span></span></h1>
<p class="para-bmpf">As my Hesperian journey draws to a close I find I’m still thanking many of the same people I was thanking at the outset. There’s a good reason for that. I’ve had a terrific team around me all the way.</p>
<p class="para-bmp">Stupendous thanks are due to my agent extraordinaire, Caitlin Blasdell; my awesome and perceptive editor, Mike Braff; my dedicated and tireless publicist, Alexandra Coumbis; and everyone else at Liza Dawson Associates and Penguin Random House/Del Rey for their imagination and energy. The last few years have been hard work, but they’ve also been immense fun, and the above-named industry professionals have brought a lot of that fun. It’s been a pleasure.</p>
<p class="para-bmp">Gratitude, respect, and wine and water in perpetuity go to my intrepid beta readers Karen Smale, Chris Cevasco, Peter Charron, and Fiona Lehn, who truly went the distance. I salute them for their valiant service.</p>
<p class="para-bmp">I’d also like to sincerely thank everyone who offered me support and friendship during the writing and, aye, promotion of these books—old friends and new; fellow writers, readers, and non-readers alike. I won’t attempt to name you all—that way lies madness—but please know that I’m both cheered and humbled.</p>
<p class="para-bmp">Thanks as ever to my parents, Peter and Jill Smale, who started the ball rolling by stoking my interest in the world around me. And love and gratitude to my very patient spouse, Karen, who has helped to keep my life running smoothly in the present day while I’ve been off adventuring in my alternate thirteenth century. Time to take some real vacations again, I think. </p></div></body></html>